README.adoc, before:

= CSM Library (`libcsm`)
:toc:
:toclevels: 4
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

A library for Cray Systems Management.

== Python

=== Usage


==== Building and using `libcsm`

* With `pip`
+
[source,bash]
----
python -m pip install setuptools_scm[toml]
python -m pip install .
----
* With `build` and `pip`
+
[source,bash]
----
python -m pip install build
python -m build
python -m install ./dist/*.whl
----

==== Using `libcsm` in another project

This module is not published to PyPi, but it is published to the Cray-HPE CSM Artifactory pip repository (which requires credentials). To use
this module without credentials, the GitHub repository must be referenced directly.

* Install
** From Artifactory (requires authentication)
*** Stable (`artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple`)
+
.Command
[source,bash]
----
python3 -m pip install --extra-index-url https://{$ARTIFACTORY_USER}:${ARTIFACTORY_TOKEN}@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple libcsm
----
+
.Output
[source,bash]
----
Looking in indexes: https://pypi.org/simple, https://doomslayer:****@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple
Collecting libcsm
  Downloading https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple/libcsm/libcsm-0.0.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (24 kB)
Installing collected packages: libcsm
Successfully installed libcsm-0.0.1
----
*** Unstable (`artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable`)
+
.Command
[source,bash]
----
python3 -m pip install --extra-index-url https://{$ARTIFACTORY_USER}:${ARTIFACTORY_TOKEN}@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable libcsm
----
+
.Output
[source,bash]
----
Looking in indexes: https://pypi.org/simple, https://doomslayer:****@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable
Collecting libcsm
  Downloading https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable/libcsm/libcsm-0.0.1a2.dev1%2Bg757ad3a-py2.py3-none-any.whl (24 kB)
Installing collected packages: libcsm
Successfully installed libcsm-0.0.1a2.dev1+g757ad3a
----
+
** From the VCS URL
+
[source,bash]
----
# From the cloned repository
python3 -m pip install .

# From the Git URL
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git

# From the Git URL from a branch
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main

# From the Git URL from tag
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v0.0.2
----

==== Importing `libcsm`

Import into another Python script or module with a standard `import` call:
[source,python]
----
import libcsm
----

Look below for examples using the `libcsm` in `pyproject.toml`, `setup.py`, and `requirements.txt` based projects.

For more information regarding VCS versioning and dependency managment, see the following references

- https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/dependency_management.html[Setuptools Dependency Management]
- pip's documentation on https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/topics/vcs-support/[VCS support]

==== Using the `libcsm` OS Package

libCSM is offered as an OS package (an `rpm`), this package installs libCSM and its dependencies into
a virtual environment on the system. The package will depend on a flavor of the `python-base` package
respective to the distribution being used.

.Note at this time the `rpm` is only available to internal HPE, it will be available via GitHub releases in the near future.
. To install and activate the virtualenv:
+
[source,bash]
----
zypper --plus-repo=https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-rpms/hpe/stable/sle-$(awk -F= '/VERSION=/{gsub(/["-]/, "") ; print tolower($NF)}' /etc/os-release)/ --no-gpg-checks in libcsm
----
. Then use `libcsm`.
- Activate the virtual environment
+
[source,bash]
----
source /usr/lib/libcsm/python/bin/activate
----
- Use the package ad-hoc in a Python interpreter:
+
[source,bash]
----
/usr/lib/libcsm/python/bin/python
----
+
[source,python]
----
import libcsm
----

===== Importing `libcsm` with a `pyproject.toml` or `setup.py` file

For `setup.py` files, the GitHub source can be included in another project by adding a `dependency_links=[]` parameter in the `setup()` function call.

* `pyproject.toml` by branch name, git-tag, or git release
+
[source,toml]
----
[project]
# ...
dependencies = [
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main",
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2",
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@eleases/tag/v1.0.1",
]
----
* `setup.py` by branch name, git-tag, or git release
+
[source,python]
----
setup(
    # ...
    install_requires=[
        # ...
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main",
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2",
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@eleases/tag/v1.0.1",
    ],
),
----

===== Importing `libcsm` with a `requirements.txt` file

Add a line like the ones below to a `requirements.txt` file.

* By branch name
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@master#egg=libcsm
----
* By git tag
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2#egg=libcsm
----
* By release
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@releases/tag/v1.0.1#egg=libcsm
----

=== Versioning

The version is derived from Git by the `setuptools_scm` Python module and follows https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#abstract[PEP0440]'s version identification
and dependency specification for https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#final-releases[final] and https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#pre-releases[pre] releases.

.All Git-Tags in this repository are prefixed with `v`.

==== Classification

The items below denote how stable, pre-release, and unstable versions are classified through
version strings.

* **(stable) final release**: A git-tag following the `X.Y.Z` semver format is considered a final release version.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {tag}
# X.Y.Z
# X - Major
# Y - Minor
# Z - Micro (a.k.a. patch)
0.1.2
----
* **(unstable) pre-release**: A git-tag with an `a`(lpha), `b`(eta), or `r`(elease) `c`(andidate) annotation and an identification number `N` denotes a pre-release/preview.
+
.These are rarely used for `libcsm`.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {tag}[{a|b|rc}N]
0.1.2a1
0.1.2b1
0.1.2rc1
----
* **(unstable) development**: Development builds **auto-increment** the micro version (the `Z` in `X.Y.Z`) or pre-release version (the `N` in `X.Y.Z{[a|b|rc]N}`), and 
then append a suffix based on whether the working directory was **clean**, **dirty**, or **mixed**.
** **clean**: When the version shows an appended `devN+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}`, that means there have been commits made since the previous git-tag.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_version}.dev{distance}+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.dev4+g818da8a

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.3a2.dev4+g818da8a
----
** **dirty**: When the version shows an appended `.d{YYYYMMDD}` datestamp, that means there were modified/uncommitted changes in the working directory when the application was built.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_version}.d(datestamp}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.d20230123

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.2a2.d20230123
----
** **mixed**: When the version shows a development tag with an appended datestamp, this means commits have been made but there were uncommitted changes present in the working directory when the application was built.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_Version}.dev{distance}+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}.d{datestamp}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.dev3+g3071655.d20230123

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.3a2.dev3+g3071655.d20230123
----

For more information about versioning, see https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm/#default-versioning-scheme[versioning scheme information].

==== Configuration

The `setuptools_scm` module is configured by `pyproject.toml`.

For more information regarding configuration of `setuptools_scm`, see https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm/#version-number-construction[version number construction].

==== Retrieving the Python Package Version at Runtime

If at any point code within the module wants to print or be aware of the modules own version, it can. The following snippet demonstrates how to do this.

[source,python]
----
from importlib.metadata import version
from importlib.metadata import PackageNotFoundError

try:
    __version__ = version("libcsm")
except PackageNotFoundError:
    # package is not installed
    pass
----

=== Contributing

The primary purpose of the `libcsm` module is to support CSM installation, upgrade, and operational procedures. This module serves as a place for offering functions and error handling to common tasks
pertaining to the aforementioned CSM procedures.

Contributions can be in the form of:

* Python code that can be imported and used in Python scripts
* Callables for the command line that make use of one or more functions/modules

==== Adding new commands

When a new or existing module of `libcsm` wants to offer a command line function an `entry_point` can be used.

For example, if we wanted a command called `hms-do-stuff` to exist on the command line that invoked some code within a `libcsm` submodule like the
code below:

[source,python]
----
# file: ./libcsm/hms/service.py
def do_stuff() -> None:
    thing = 'cool stuff'
    print(f'Doing {thing}')
    foo(thing)

def foo(stuff: str) -> None:
    with open('/tmp/foo', 'w') as file:
        file.write(f'finished doing {stuff}')
----

Then we could add an Entry Point to the `entry_points.ini` file

[source,ini]
----
[console_scripts]
hms-do-stuff = 'libcsm.hms.service:do_stuff'
----

== Shell

=== Usage

==== Locally

Use the library in a local/development environment.

.Source the shell library
[source,bash]
----
SOURCEPREFIX="$(pwd)/sh"
. ${SOURCEPREFIX}/lib.sh
----

==== On a CSM System

Use the library on a CSM system.

The library is installed on the following node types:

* pre-install-toolkits (PIT)
* non-compute-nodes (NCN)

.Source the shell library.
[source,bash]
----
SOURCEPREFIX="/usr/lib/libcsm/sh"
. ${SOURCEPREFIX}/lib.sh
----

=== Shell specific notes

As this is library shell and intended to be usable in minimal containers and elsewhere, we want to ensure all shell is usable in any bourne compatible shell.
That includes `ash`, `dash`, busybox `sh`, etc.
Note `c` and `teco c` shells are not included in this definition.

To aide in this we have a GitHub action, https://github.com/luizm/action-sh-checker[action-sh-checker] that will be used to run the following on all pull requests:

* `shellcheck`
* `shfmt`
* checkbashisms

This will help to ensure all library code remains portable and consistently formatted and enforced.

To run this action locally against work in progress changes install https://github.com/nektos/act[`act`] and/or `docker` or some other equivalent and run `act -j sh-checker`.

=== Shell unit tests

As we want to ensure portability across posix shells, the unit test library of choice is shellspec.
For details why see https://shellspec.info/comparison.html[`shellspec`'s compression page] in essence it has more features than bats and also allows
us to ensure other shells function.

To locally run tests ensure one has https://github.com/shellspec/shellspec[`shellspec`] installed and available locally and one may simply run `shellspec` or `make test` to run all the unit tests.
To run against all configured shells known to work run `make test-all`.

If one also has https://github.com/eradman/entr[entr] installed one can run `make ci` to run against all of the configured shells in the `makefile` on every update to a shell script.

.Run unit tests:
[source,sh]
----
make ci
----

.Example output:
[source,text]
----
+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell sh
Running: /run/current-system/sw/bin/sh [bash 5.1.16(1)-release]
.............

Finished in 0.68 seconds (user 0.41 seconds, sys 0.27 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell bash
Running: /run/current-system/sw/bin/bash [bash 5.1.16(1)-release]
.............

Finished in 0.68 seconds (user 0.41 seconds, sys 0.26 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell ksh
Running: /bin/ksh [ksh Version AJM 93u+ 2012-08-01]
.............

Finished in 0.40 seconds (user 0.01 seconds, sys 0.00 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ date
Mon Oct 10 12:39:36 CDT 2022
----

[NOTE]
====
This presumes all of the shells are available locally.
This will become a GitHub action as well in a future pull-request.
====

Commit message:

Fix RPM Metadata and Promotion Race Cond.
PR #27 brought in some build optimizations, but broke RPM metadata. The
`addRpmMetaData.sh` script's changes are not making it into the RPM.
This ensures that the script runs within its own build's directory, and
targets the `.spec` that the RPM will use. This also fixes a race
condtion where `runLibraryScript()` removes/cleans-up the
`addRpmMetaData.sh` script out from under the other matrix builders.

This also adds more time to the promotion logic to allow for cases where
one matrix build takes longer to sign its RPM than another build.

README.adoc, after:

= CSM Library (`libcsm`)
:toc:
:toclevels: 4
ifdef::env-github[]
:tip-caption: :bulb:
:note-caption: :information_source:
:important-caption: :heavy_exclamation_mark:
:caution-caption: :fire:
:warning-caption: :warning:
endif::[]

A library for Cray Systems Management.

== Python

=== Usage


==== Building and using `libcsm`

* With `pip`
+
[source,bash]
----
python -m pip install setuptools_scm[toml]
python -m pip install .
----
* With `build` and `pip`
+
[source,bash]
----
python -m pip install build
python -m build
python -m install ./dist/*.whl
----

==== Using `libcsm` in another project

This module is not published to PyPi, but it is published to the Cray-HPE CSM Artifactory pip repository (which requires credentials). To use
this module without credentials, the GitHub repository must be referenced directly.

* Install
** From Artifactory (requires authentication)
*** Stable (`artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple`)
+
.Command
[source,bash]
----
python3 -m pip install --extra-index-url https://{$ARTIFACTORY_USER}:${ARTIFACTORY_TOKEN}@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple libcsm
----
+
.Output
[source,bash]
----
Looking in indexes: https://pypi.org/simple, https://doomslayer:****@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple
Collecting libcsm
  Downloading https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/simple/libcsm/libcsm-0.0.1-py2.py3-none-any.whl (24 kB)
Installing collected packages: libcsm
Successfully installed libcsm-0.0.1
----
*** Unstable (`artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable`)
+
.Command
[source,bash]
----
python3 -m pip install --extra-index-url https://{$ARTIFACTORY_USER}:${ARTIFACTORY_TOKEN}@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable libcsm
----
+
.Output
[source,bash]
----
Looking in indexes: https://pypi.org/simple, https://doomslayer:****@artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable
Collecting libcsm
  Downloading https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-python-modules/unstable/libcsm/libcsm-0.0.1a2.dev1%2Bg757ad3a-py2.py3-none-any.whl (24 kB)
Installing collected packages: libcsm
Successfully installed libcsm-0.0.1a2.dev1+g757ad3a
----
+
** From the VCS URL
+
[source,bash]
----
# From the cloned repository
python3 -m pip install .

# From the Git URL
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git

# From the Git URL from a branch
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main

# From the Git URL from tag
python3 -m pip install git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v0.0.2
----

==== Importing `libcsm`

Import into another Python script or module with a standard `import` call:
[source,python]
----
import libcsm
----

Look below for examples using the `libcsm` in `pyproject.toml`, `setup.py`, and `requirements.txt` based projects.

For more information regarding VCS versioning and dependency managment, see the following references

- https://setuptools.pypa.io/en/latest/userguide/dependency_management.html[Setuptools Dependency Management]
- pip's documentation on https://pip.pypa.io/en/latest/topics/vcs-support/[VCS support]

==== Using the `libcsm` OS Package

libCSM is offered as an OS package (an `rpm`), this package installs libCSM and its dependencies into
a virtual environment on the system. The package will depend on a flavor of the `python-base` package
respective to the distribution being used.

.Note at this time the `rpm` is only available to internal HPE, it will be available via GitHub releases in the near future.
. To install and activate the virtualenv:
+
[source,bash]
----
zypper --plus-repo=https://artifactory.algol60.net/artifactory/csm-rpms/hpe/stable/sle-$(awk -F= '/VERSION=/{gsub(/["-]/, "") ; print tolower($NF)}' /etc/os-release)/ --no-gpg-checks in libcsm
----
. Then use `libcsm`.
- Activate the virtual environment
+
[source,bash]
----
source /usr/lib/libcsm/python/bin/activate
----
- Use the package ad-hoc in a Python interpreter:
+
[source,bash]
----
/usr/lib/libcsm/python/bin/python
----
+
[source,python]
----
import libcsm
----

===== Importing `libcsm` with a `pyproject.toml` or `setup.py` file

For `setup.py` files, the GitHub source can be included in another project by adding a `dependency_links=[]` parameter in the `setup()` function call.

* `pyproject.toml` by branch name, git-tag, or git release
+
[source,toml]
----
[project]
# ...
dependencies = [
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main",
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2",
    "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@eleases/tag/v1.0.1",
]
----
* `setup.py` by branch name, git-tag, or git release
+
[source,python]
----
setup(
    # ...
    install_requires=[
        # ...
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@main",
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2",
        "libcsm @ git+https://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@eleases/tag/v1.0.1",
    ],
),
----

===== Importing `libcsm` with a `requirements.txt` file

Add a line like the ones below to a `requirements.txt` file.

* By branch name
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@master#egg=libcsm
----
* By git tag
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@v1.0.2#egg=libcsm
----
* By release
+
[source,python]
----
git+git://github.com/Cray-HPE/libcsm.git@releases/tag/v1.0.1#egg=libcsm
----

=== Versioning

The version is derived from Git by the `setuptools_scm` Python module and follows https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#abstract[PEP0440]'s version identification
and dependency specification for https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#final-releases[final] and https://peps.python.org/pep-0440/#pre-releases[pre] releases.

.All Git-Tags in this repository are prefixed with `v`.

==== Classification

The items below denote how stable, pre-release, and unstable versions are classified through
version strings.

* **(stable) final release**: A git-tag following the `X.Y.Z` semver format is considered a final release version.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {tag}
# X.Y.Z
# X - Major
# Y - Minor
# Z - Micro (a.k.a. patch)
0.1.2
----
* **(stable) post release**: A git-tag following the `X.Y.Z.postN` (where `N` is an integer), indicates a post-release.
These are seldom used, and are strictly for handling documentation, packaging, or other meta
updates after a release tag was already created where it isn't warranted to publish an
entirely new release. `1.0.0.post0` and `1.0.0` are considered the same version in this repository. `1.0.0.post1` would
produce an RPM with a release version of `2` (since our RPMs index their releases starting at `1`).
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {tag}
# X.Y.Z.postN
# X - Major
# Y - Minor
# Z - Micro (a.k.a. patch)
# Z - Post release [1-9]+
0.1.2.post1
----
* **(unstable) pre-release**: A git-tag with an `a`(lpha), `b`(eta), or `r`(elease) `c`(andidate) annotation and an identification number `N` denotes a pre-release/preview.
+
.These are rarely used for `libcsm`.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {tag}[{a|b|rc}N]
0.1.2a1
0.1.2b1
0.1.2rc1
----
* **(unstable) development**: Development builds **auto-increment** the micro version (the `Z` in `X.Y.Z`) or pre-release version (the `N` in `X.Y.Z{[a|b|rc]N}`), and 
then append a suffix based on whether the working directory was **clean**, **dirty**, or **mixed**.
** **clean**: When the version shows an appended `devN+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}`, that means there have been commits made since the previous git-tag.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_version}.dev{distance}+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.dev4+g818da8a

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.3a2.dev4+g818da8a
----
** **dirty**: When the version shows an appended `.d{YYYYMMDD}` datestamp, that means there were modified/uncommitted changes in the working directory when the application was built.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_version}.d(datestamp}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.d20230123

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.2a2.d20230123
----
** **mixed**: When the version shows a development tag with an appended datestamp, this means commits have been made but there were uncommitted changes present in the working directory when the application was built.
+
[source,bash]
----
# Format:
# {next_Version}.dev{distance}+{scm_letter}{revision_short_hash}.d{datestamp}

# If the previous git-tag was 0.1.2:
           0.1.3.dev3+g3071655.d20230123

# If the previous get-tag was a pre-release of 0.1.3a1:
         0.1.3a2.dev3+g3071655.d20230123
----

For more information about versioning, see https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm/#default-versioning-scheme[versioning scheme information].

==== Configuration

The `setuptools_scm` module is configured by `pyproject.toml`.

For more information regarding configuration of `setuptools_scm`, see https://github.com/pypa/setuptools_scm/#version-number-construction[version number construction].

==== Retrieving the Python Package Version at Runtime

If at any point code within the module wants to print or be aware of the modules own version, it can. The following snippet demonstrates how to do this.

[source,python]
----
from importlib.metadata import version
from importlib.metadata import PackageNotFoundError

try:
    __version__ = version("libcsm")
except PackageNotFoundError:
    # package is not installed
    pass
----

=== Contributing

The primary purpose of the `libcsm` module is to support CSM installation, upgrade, and operational procedures. This module serves as a place for offering functions and error handling to common tasks
pertaining to the aforementioned CSM procedures.

Contributions can be in the form of:

* Python code that can be imported and used in Python scripts
* Callables for the command line that make use of one or more functions/modules

==== Adding new commands

When a new or existing module of `libcsm` wants to offer a command line function an `entry_point` can be used.

For example, if we wanted a command called `hms-do-stuff` to exist on the command line that invoked some code within a `libcsm` submodule like the
code below:

[source,python]
----
# file: ./libcsm/hms/service.py
def do_stuff() -> None:
    thing = 'cool stuff'
    print(f'Doing {thing}')
    foo(thing)

def foo(stuff: str) -> None:
    with open('/tmp/foo', 'w') as file:
        file.write(f'finished doing {stuff}')
----

Then we could add an Entry Point to the `entry_points.ini` file

[source,ini]
----
[console_scripts]
hms-do-stuff = 'libcsm.hms.service:do_stuff'
----

== Shell

=== Usage

==== Locally

Use the library in a local/development environment.

.Source the shell library
[source,bash]
----
SOURCEPREFIX="$(pwd)/sh"
. ${SOURCEPREFIX}/lib.sh
----

==== On a CSM System

Use the library on a CSM system.

The library is installed on the following node types:

* pre-install-toolkits (PIT)
* non-compute-nodes (NCN)

.Source the shell library.
[source,bash]
----
SOURCEPREFIX="/usr/lib/libcsm/sh"
. ${SOURCEPREFIX}/lib.sh
----

=== Shell specific notes

As this is library shell and intended to be usable in minimal containers and elsewhere, we want to ensure all shell is usable in any bourne compatible shell.
That includes `ash`, `dash`, busybox `sh`, etc.
Note `c` and `teco c` shells are not included in this definition.

To aide in this we have a GitHub action, https://github.com/luizm/action-sh-checker[action-sh-checker] that will be used to run the following on all pull requests:

* `shellcheck`
* `shfmt`
* checkbashisms

This will help to ensure all library code remains portable and consistently formatted and enforced.

To run this action locally against work in progress changes install https://github.com/nektos/act[`act`] and/or `docker` or some other equivalent and run `act -j sh-checker`.

=== Shell unit tests

As we want to ensure portability across posix shells, the unit test library of choice is shellspec.
For details why see https://shellspec.info/comparison.html[`shellspec`'s compression page] in essence it has more features than bats and also allows
us to ensure other shells function.

To locally run tests ensure one has https://github.com/shellspec/shellspec[`shellspec`] installed and available locally and one may simply run `shellspec` or `make test` to run all the unit tests.
To run against all configured shells known to work run `make test-all`.

If one also has https://github.com/eradman/entr[entr] installed one can run `make ci` to run against all of the configured shells in the `makefile` on every update to a shell script.

.Run unit tests:
[source,sh]
----
make ci
----

.Example output:
[source,text]
----
+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell sh
Running: /run/current-system/sw/bin/sh [bash 5.1.16(1)-release]
.............

Finished in 0.68 seconds (user 0.41 seconds, sys 0.27 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell bash
Running: /run/current-system/sw/bin/bash [bash 5.1.16(1)-release]
.............

Finished in 0.68 seconds (user 0.41 seconds, sys 0.26 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ for s in sh bash ksh
+ shellspec --shell ksh
Running: /bin/ksh [ksh Version AJM 93u+ 2012-08-01]
.............

Finished in 0.40 seconds (user 0.01 seconds, sys 0.00 seconds)
13 examples, 0 failures

+ date
Mon Oct 10 12:39:36 CDT 2022
----

[NOTE]
====
This presumes all of the shells are available locally.
This will become a GitHub action as well in a future pull-request.
====
